# Plos in Computational Biology paper related with github for researchers, code, source and document

## Description 

The present repository contains all the documentation of the paper
entitle: **"Ten Simple Rules for taking advantage of GitHub in
bioinformatics"**. Our main aim here is to highlight specific GitHub
features that will enable the bioinformatics community to use GitHub
features and tools in a daily basics. We will then provide a set of
recommendations for taking full advantage of its core features to
facilitate and manage the work on a given bioinformatics project and
increase its profile to the scientific community. We think the
manuscript is timely due to the announcement of the closure of another
widely used service, Google Code. Therefore, many of the users of
Google Code will therefore have to migrate to GitHub.


# How to contribute 

If you have an idea for a new Rule to add or change to the main
manuscript or Figure, etc, it is best to communicate with main authors
of the paper. The most common venues for this are GitHub issues for
common specification
[issues](https://github.com/ypriverol/github-paper/issues). Browse
through existing GitHub issues and if one seems related, comment on
it. If no existing issue seems appropriate, a new issue can be opened
using this form.

## Changes and Ideas

All changes to the manuscript should be made through pull requests to this repository. 

If you are new to Git, the
[Try Git](https://www.codeschool.com/courses/try-git) tutorial is a
good places to start. More learning resources are available
[here](https://help.github.com/articles/good-resources-for-learning-git-and-github/).

1. Create a GitHub account and log in.

2. Fork the paper repository on GitHub to make your changes. 

3. Choose the correct branch to develop your changes against or create
   a new one (this is typically `master`).

4. Serious problems or major changes should not be fixed via pull
   request - please open an issue to discuss these beforehand.

5. Commit and push your changes to your fork.

6. Open a pull request with these changes. You pull request message
   ideally should include:
   - A motivation of why the changes should be made.
   - A brief description of the changes.

7. The pull request should be reviewed and merge by another member of
   the paper.
